# Requirements Definition

---

In contrast to the world of classic software engineering, FOSS communities do not seem to readily adopt or practice modern software engineering or requirements engineering processes. Perhaps this is no surprise. However, these communities do develop software that is extremely valuable, generally reliable, often trustworthy, and readily used within its associated user community. So, what processes are being used to develop the requirements for open software systems?

## Activities & Processes

In open software development projects, requirements engineering efforts are implied activities that routinely emerge as a by-product of community discourse about what their software should or should not do, as well as who will take responsibility for realizing such requirements. Open software system requirements appear in the form of situated discourse within private and public email discussion threads, emergent artifacts \(e.g., source code fragments included within a message\) and dialectical social actions that negotiate interest, commitment, and accountability. More simply, traditional requirements engineering activities do not have first-class status as an assigned or recognized task within open software communities. Similarly, there are no software engineering tools used to support the capture, negotiation, and cost estimate \(e.g., level of effort, expertise/skill, and timeliness\) of open software development efforts, though each of these activities occurs regularly but informally.

Open software systems may be very reliable and high quality in their users’ assessments. Nonetheless requirements do exist, though finding or recognizing them demands familiarity and immersion within the community and its discussions. This of course stands in contrast to efforts within the academic software engineering or requirements engineering community to develop and demonstrate tools for explicitly capturing requirements, negotiating trade-offs among system requirements and stakeholder interests, and constructive cost estimation or modeling.

Developing open software requirements is a community building process. In this regard, the development of requirements for open software is not a traditional requirements engineering process, at least, not yet. It is instead socio-technical process that entails the development of constructive social relationships, informally negotiated social agreements, and a commitment to participate through sustained contribution of software discourse and shared representations, much like the other processes identified above. Thus, community building and sustaining participation are essential and recurring activities that enable open software to persist without central corporate authority.

## New Types of Requirements

Open software Web sites serve as hubs that centralize attention for what is happening with the development of the focal open software system, its status, participants and contributors, discourse on pending/future needs, etc. Furthermore, by there very nature, open software Web sites \(those accessible outside of a corporate firewall\) are generally global in reach and accessibility. This means the potential exists for contributors to come from multiple remote sites \(geographic dispersion\) at different times \(24/7\), from multiple nations, potentially representing the interests of multiple cultures or ethnicity. All of these conditions point to new kinds of requirements — for example, community building requirements, community software requirements, and community information sharing system \(Web site and interlinked communication channels for email, forums, and chat\) requirements. These requirements may entail both functional and non-functional requirements, but they will most typically be expressed using open software information, rather than using formal notations based on some system of mathematical logic.

