#### Operation Of Community:

**1.Use version control:** the version control is aim to distinguish each team member's contribution and return to the previous version if there is need to roll back to the previous version.

A component of [software configuration management](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_configuration_management) ,version control, also known as revision control or source control,[\[1\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control#cite_note-Mercurial-1)is the management of changes to documents,[computer programs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_program), large web sites, and other collections of information. Changes are usually identified by a number or letter code, termed the "revision number", "revision level", or simply "revision". For example, an initial set of files is "revision 1". When the first change is made, the resulting set is "revision 2", and so on. Each revision is associated with a [timestamp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timestamp) and the person making the change. Revisions can be compared, restored, and with some types of files, merged.

The need for a logical way to organize and control revisions has existed for almost as long as [writing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Writing) has existed, but revision control became much more important, and complicated, when the era of computing began. The numbering of [book editions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edition_%28book%29) and of [specification revisions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Specification_%28technical_standard%29) are examples that date back to the print-only era. Today, the most capable \(as well as complex\) revision control systems are those used in [software development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_development), where a team of people may change the same files.

**2.Use effective communication tools: **Let each contributors have an effective communication way to share the ideas, they can use email or slack or other effective ways.

All good open-source projects give people a place to go to ask questions, and the easiest way to achieve that is by setting up a mailing list.

Setting up a mailing list with [Yahoo Groups](http://groups.yahoo.com/) or [Google Groups](http://groups.google.com/) is easy and free. Make sure to do that before announcing the project’s availability, and actively encourage people to use the mailing list to ask questions. Link to the mailing list prominently on the website \(if you have one\) or in the documentation.

The other important part of running a mailing list is to actively monitor it. Nothing is more frustrating for end users or contributors than being ignored. If you’ve set up a mailing list, take the time to monitor it and respond to people who ask questions. This is the best way to foster a community of developers around the project. Getting a decent amount of traffic onto the mailing list can take some time, but it’s worth the effort. Offer advice to people who want to contribute; suggest to people to file tickets when appropriate \(don’t let the mailing list turn into a bug tracker!\); and use the feedback you get from the mailing list to improve documentation.

**3.Start a committee:** For some project, the committee is a necessary way to start a committee,  they can hire some high level and experienced engineers to monitor the change and commit to the project, and decide whether the commit can be merged into the project.

The Committee studies and, when appropriate, reports on issues relating to open source licensing, governance, and litigation.  Development and distribution of software and other technologies under open source \(sometimes called “free”\) licenses has become a multibillion dollar industry. There are a wide variety of open source licenses available \(many, but not all, of which can be found at the Open Source Initiative’s website: www.opensource.org\), ranging from ”academic” or “permissive” licenses like the Berkeley Systems Distribution \(BSD\) license to “copyleft” licenses like the GNU General Public Licenses \(GPL\). All of these licenses raise legal, business, and policy issues and have different requirements with respect to copyright, patent, and other intellectual property to which the licensor gives fairly unrestricted rights.  Some of the ramifications of these various licenses are yet to be fully interpreted by courts or administrative bodies, and as a result there are a variety of opinions on how these licenses would ultimately be enforced.  Open source licenses raise many as-yet-unresolved issues involving IP ownership, licensing, control, integration, business model, divestiture and merger/acquisition, among others.  The Committee’s primary purposes will be to monitor, discuss, and possibly participate \(under Board direction\) in legal developments associated with open source licensing, to participate \(under Board direction\) in formulating any agreed-upon IPO policies relating to open source licensing, to inform the IPO Board and membership of current issues and practices relevant to open source licensing, and to take positions consistent with the needs and desires of the IPO Board and members on open source licensing in appropriate fora.

