# Testing and Releasing

Once the source distribution is produced from the stabilized release branch, the public part of the release process begins. But before the distribution is made available to the world at large, it should be tested and approved by some minimum number of developers, usually three or more. That approval must then be signalled to the world at large, using digital signatures and identifying hashes.The purpose of signing and hashing is to give users a way to verify that the copy they receive has not been maliciously tampered with. In most projects, the developers just use their personal digital signatures, instead of a shared project key, and as many developers as want to may sign \(i.e., there is a minimum number, but not a maximum\). The more developers sign, the more testing the release undergoes, and also the greater the likelihood that a security-conscious user can find a web-of-trust path from herself to the release.

Once approved, the release \(that is, all tarballs, zip files, and whatever other formats are being dis- tributed\) should be placed into the project's download area, accompanied by the digital signatures and hashes. There are various standards for doing this. One way is to accompany each released package with a file giving the corresponding digital signatures, and another file giving the checksum. For ex- ample, if one of the released packages is scanley-2.5.0.tar.gz, place in the same directo-ry a file scanley-2.5.0.tar.gz.asc containing the digital signature for that tarball, anoth- er file scanley-2.5.0.tar.gz.md5 containing its MD5 checksum, perhaps another, scan- ley-2.5.0.tar.gz.sha256, containing its SHA256 checksum, etc. A different way to pro- vide checking is to collect all the signatures for all the released packages into a single file, scan- ley-2.5.0.sigs; the same may be done with the checksums.

## Candidate Releases

For important releases containing many changes, many projects prefer to put out release candidates first, e.g., scanley-2.5.0-beta1 before scanley-2.5.0. The purpose of a candidate is to sub- ject the code to wide testing before blessing it as an official release. If problems are found, they are fixed on the release branch and a new candidate release is rolled out \(scanley-2.5.0-beta2\). The cycle continues until no unacceptable bugs are left, at which point the last candidate release becomes the offi- cial release — that is, the only difference between the last candidate release and the real release is the re- moval of the qualifier from the version number.

In most other respects, a candidate release should be treated the same as a real release. The alpha, beta, or rc qualifier is enough to warn conservative users to wait until the real release, and of course the an- nouncement emails for the candidate releases should point out that their purpose is to solicit feedback. Other than that, give candidate releases the same amount of care as regular releases. After all, you want people to use the candidates, because exposure is the best way to uncover bugs, and also because you never know which candidate release will end up becoming the official release.

## Announcing Releases

Announcing a release is like announcing any other event, and should use the procedures described in the section called “Publicity” in Chapter 6, Communications. There are a few specific things to do for re- leases, though.

Whenever you write the URL to the downloadable release tarball, make sure to also write the MD5/ SHA1 checksums and pointers to the digital signatures file. Since the announcement happens in multi- ple forums \(mailing list, news page, etc.\), this means users can get the checksums from multiple sources, which gives the most security-conscious among them extra assurance that the checksums themselves have not been tampered with. Meanwhile, giving the link to the digital signature files multiple times doesn't make those signatures more secure, but it does reassure people \(especially those who don't fol- low the project closely\) that the project takes security seriously.

In the announcement email, and on news pages that contain more than just a blurb about the release, make sure to include the relevant portion of the CHANGES file, so people can see why it might be in their interests to upgrade. This is as important with candidate releases as with final releases; the presence of bugfixes and new features is important in tempting people to try out a candidate release.

Finally, don't forget to thank the development team, the testers, and all the people who took the time to file good bug reports. Don't single out anyone by name, though, unless there's someone who is individ- ually responsible for a huge piece of work, the value of which is widely recognized by everyone in the project. Be wary of sliding down the slippery slope of credit inflation \(see the section called “Credit” in Chapter 8, Managing Participants\).

